As mentioned in a previous section on parameterized tests,
we will be validating check-in and check-out dates.
In this demo,
we'll be verifying that several rules around check-in and
check-out dates are being enforced.
The rules are, verify dates are in the month,
day, year format, verify dates are valid.
For example, we do not want to accept a date of February 30th.
Verify both dates are in the future,
verify that check-out date is at least one day after the check-in date.
Finally,
we want to send as many valid error responses back to the user as possible.
That is, if the check-in date is in the past,
and the check-out date is missing,
we want to send it back an error message for both issues,
not just one or the other.
This will make the process of using our service less frustrating to users.
The first step to writing parameterized tests in JUnit 5 is to
include the junit-jupiter-params library.
This is an example of how JUnit 5 is extensible rather than implemented.
Instead of parameterized tests being part of the core JUnit 5 library,
it's an additional library so it can evolve independently,
or possibly, better implementations to be written.
In the BookingService,
I went ahead and did a basic implementation of the code to check
if the check-in and check-out dates are valid.
If the dates are not valid, a list of errors is returned.
If the dates are valid, then an empty list is returned.
Improvements probably could be made,
and if we wanted to go back and improve this code,
the tests we are about to write will give
confidence that we don't introduce bugs.
Over in our test class,
a parameterized test is appropriately declared with
the ParameterizedTest annotation.
Next, we need to add the data source for our test.
In this example, I am using a MethodSource,
but as mentioned, other options exist.
MethodSource works appropriately by looking for a
matching name within the class.
The return type for the method must be a stream typed to the
same argument type of the parameterized test.
Below, I created a simple class to handle the arguments I will be passing in.
In the constructor of the class,
I am accepting the check-in and check-out date as the first two elements,
and a variable number of error messages using the Java ellipsis operator.
The first test is a simple happy path of two valid dates.
Running the test, we get green.
Next example I am passing in a null check-in date.
Running the test again returns green.
If we look at a test run, it's not very informative of what is happening.
We are told the name of the parameterized test we are running,
but each iteration is simply given a number followed
by the qualified path to the test.
We can do better.
In the parameterized test declaration, we will tell it to print out the first,
and in our case only, argument being passed in.
In our DateValidationBean class,
we will update it to take in an additional string,
we will call that testName, and also implement toString to return testName.
Rerunning the test, we get much better output.
Again, let's add a couple more test cases,
one where both dates are null, and another with an invalid date of February 30th.
Rerunning the test, hmm, a failure.
We didn't get any errors for the invalid check-in date test.
So the problem by default,
the SimpleDateFormat class will simply read February 30th as March 2nd.
We don't want that.
We want simpleDateFormat to be stricter,
which can be done by simply setting setLenient to be false.
Running the test again, it passes.
Parameterized testing is great for scenarios like this.
There are a lot of different paths through the code that
validates check-in and check-out dates; however,
the setup for each of the tests is very similar.
Using parameterized tests makes the cost of adding new tests and maintaining existing tests much less.